<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/stylesheet.css"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/page_styles.css"/>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
</head>

<body>
  <h2 id="part1-chapter1_title" class="chapter-title">1</h2>
  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-0" class="p-indent">Maman  died  today.  Or  yesterday  maybe,  I  don't  know. I  got  a  telegram  from  the  home:  "Mother  deceased. Funeral  tomorrow.  Faithfully  yours." That doesn't  mean anything.  Maybe it was yesterday. </p>
  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-1" class="p-indent">The old people's home is at Marengo, about eighty kilometers  from Algiers,  I'll  take  the  two  o'clock  bus  and get there in the afternoon. That way I can be there for the vigil and come back tomorrow  night.  I asked my  boss  for two  days  off  and  there  was  no  way  he  was  going  to  refuse  me  with  an  excuse  like  that.  But  he  wasn't  too happy about it.  I even  said,  "It's not my fault."  He didn't say anything. Then I  thought I  shouldn't have said  that.After  all,  I  didn't  have  anything  to  apologize  for.  He's the one who should have offered his condolences.  But he probably  will  day  after  tomorrow,  when  he  sees  I'm  in mourning. For now, it's almost as if Maman weren't dead. After  the  funeral,  though,  the  case  will  be  closed,  and everything will  have  a  more  official  feel  to  it. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-2" class="p-indent">I  caught  the  two  o'clock  bus.  It  was  very  hot.  I  ate at  the  restaurant,  at  Céleste's,  as  usual.  Everybody  felt very  sorry  for me,  and  Céleste  said,  "You  only  have  one mother."  When  I  left,  they  walked  me  to  the  door.  I was  a  little  distracted  because  I  still  had  to  go  up  to Emmanuel's place to borrow a black tie and an arm band. He lost his uncle a  few  months  back. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-3" class="p-indent">I  ran  so  as  not  to  miss  the  bus.  It  was  probably  because  of  all  the  rushing  around,  and  on  top  of  that  the bumpy  ride,  the  smell  of  gasoline,  and  the  glare  of  the sky  and  the  road,  that  I  dozed  off.  I  slept  almost the  whole  way.  And  when  I  woke  up,  I  was  slumped against a  soldier who smiled at me  and asked  if  I'd  been traveling  long.  I  said,  "Yes,"  just  so  I  wouldn't  have  to say  anything  else.</p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-4" class="p-indent">The home is two kilometers from the village. I walked them.  I  wanted  to  see  Maman  right  away.  But  the caretaker told me I had to see the director first.  He was busy, so  I  waited  awhile.  The caretaker talked  the  whole  time and then  I  saw  the director.  I  was shown  into  his  office.He  was  a  little  old  man  with  the  ribbon  of  the  Legion of  Honor  in  his  lapel.  He  looked  at  me  with  his  clear eyes.  Then  he  shook  my  hand  and  held  it so long  I didn't  know  how  to  get  it  loose.  He  thumbed  through a  file  and  said,  "Madame  Meursault  came  to  us  three years  ago.  You  were  her sole  support."  I  thought  he  was criticizing  me  for  something  and I started  to  explain. But  he cut me  off.  "You  don't  have  to  justify  yourself, my  dear  boy.  I've  read  your  mother's  file.  You  weren't able  to provide for her properly.  She needed someone to look  after  her.  You  earn  only  a  modest  salary.  And  the truth  of  the  matter  is,  she  was  happier  here."  I  said, "Yes,  sir."  He  added,  "You  see,  she  had  friends  here, people  her  own  age.  She  was  able  to  share  things  from the old  days  with  them.  You're  young,  and  it  must  have been  hard for her with  you." </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-5" class="p-indent">It was true. When she was at home with me, Maman used to spend her time following  me  with  her  eyes,  not saying a  thing. For the first few days she was at the home she  cried  a  lot.  But  that  was  because  she  wasn't used  to it. A  few months  later  and  she would  have  cried  if  she'd been  taken  out.  She  was used to  it.  That's partly why  I didn't go  there  much  this  past  year.  And  also  because  it took  up  my  Sunday—not  to  mention  the  trouble  of getting to the bus, buying tickets, and spending two hours traveling. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-6" class="p-indent">The director spoke to me again. But I wasn't really listening anymore. Then he said, "I suppose you'd like to see your mother." I got up without saying anything and he led the way to the door. On the way downstairs, he explained, "We've moved her to our little mortuary. So as not to upset the others. Whenever one of the residents dies, the others are a bit on edge for the next two or three days. And that makes it difficult to care for them." We crossed a courtyard where there were lots of old people chatting in little groups. As we went by, the talking would stop. And then the conversation would start up again behind us. The sound was like the muffied jabber of parakeets. The director stopped at the door of a small building. ''I'll leave you now, Monsieur Meursault. If you need me for anything, I'll be in my office. As is usually the case, the funeral is set for ten o'clock in the morning. This way you'll be able to keep vigil over the departed. One last thing: it seems your mother often expressed to her friends her desire for a religious burial. I've taken the liberty of making the necessary arrangements. But I wanted to let you know." I thanked him. While not an atheist, Maman had never in her life given a thought to religion.</p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-7" class="p-indent">I  went  in.  It  was  a  very  bright,  whitewashed  room with  a  skylight  for  a  roof.  The  furniture  consisted  of some  chairs  and  some  cross-shaped  sawhorses.  Two  of them,  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  were  supporting  a closed casket.  All you  could  see  were  some  shiny  screws, not  screwed  down  all  the  way,  standing  out  against  the walnut-stained  planks.  Near  the  casket  was  an  Arab nurse  in a  white  smock,  with  a  brightly colored scarf  on her head. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-8" class="p-indent">Just then the caretaker came in behind me.  He must have  been  running.  He  stuttered  a  little.  "We  put  the cover  on,  but I'm supposed to unscrew the casket so  you can  see  her."  He was  moving  toward  the  casket  when  I stopped him.  He said,  "You  don't  want  to?"  I  answered, "No."  He  was  quiet,  and  I  was  embarrassed  because  I felt I shouldn't have said  that.  He looked  at  me  and  then asked,  "Why  not?"  but without criticizing,  as if  he  just wanted to know.  I said, "I don't know."  He started twirling his moustache, and then without looking at me,  again he said,  "I understand."  He had  nice pale  blue eyes and a  reddish  complexion.  He  offered  me  a  chair  and  then sat down  right  behind me.  The nurse  stood up  and  went toward  the door.  At  that point  the caretaker  said  to  me, "She's  got  an  abscess."  I  didn't  understand,  so  I  looked over  at  the  nurse  and  saw  that  she  had  a  bandage wrapped  around  her  head  just  below  the  eyes.  Where her  nose  should  have  been,  the  bandage  was flat.  All you  could  see  of her  face was  the  whiteness  of  the  bandage. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-9" class="p-indent">When  she'd  gone,  the  caretaker  said,  ''I'll  leave  you alone."  I  don't  know  what  kind  of  gesture  I  made,  but he stayed where he was, behind me. Having this presence breathing down  my  neck was  starting  to  annoy  me.  The room  was  filled  with  beautiful  late-afternoon  sunlight. Two  hornets  were  buzzing  against  the  glass  roof.  I could feel myself getting sleepy.  Without turning around, I  said  to  the  caretaker,  "Have  you  been  here  long?" Right  away  he  answered,  "Five  years"—as  if  he'd  been waiting all  along for me  to  ask. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-10" class="p-indent">After that he did a lot of talking.  He would have been very surprised  if  anyone  had  told  him  he would  end  up caretaker  at  the  Marengo  home.  He  was  sixty-four  and came  from  Paris.  At  that point  I  interrupted  him.  "Oh, you're  not from  around  here?"  Then  I  remembered  that before  taking  me  to  the  director's  office,  he  had  talked to  me  about  Maman.  He'd  told  me  that  they  had  to bury her quickly, because it gets hot in  the  plains,  especially in this part of  the country. That was when he told me  he had lived  in  Paris  and  that  he  had  found  it  hard to  forget  it.  In  Paris  they  keep  vigil  over  the  body  for three,  sometimes  four  days.  But  here  you  barely  have time  to  get  used  to  the  idea  before  you  have  to  start running after the hearse. Then his wife had said to him, "Hush now, that's not the sort  of thing to  be  telling the gentleman."  The  old  man  had  blushed  and  apologized. I'd stepped in  and  said,  "No,  not  at all."  I  thought what he'd been saying was  interesting and made sense. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-11" class="p-indent">In  the  little  mortuary  he told  me  that  he'd  come  to the  home  because  he  was  destitute.  He  was  in  good health,  so he'd  offered  to  take  on  the  job  of caretaker.  I pointed  out  that even  so  he was  still  a  resident.  He  said no,  he  wasn't.  I'd  already  been  struck  by  the  way  he had of saying "they"  or "the others"  and,  less  often,  "the old  people,"  talking  about  the  patients,  when  some  of them  weren't  any  older  than  he  was.  But  of  course  it wasn't the  same.  He was  the  caretaker,  and  to  a  certain extent he had authority over them. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-12" class="p-indent">Just  then  the  nurse  came  in.  Night  had  fallen  suddenly.  Darkness  had  gathered,  quickly,  above  the  skylight. The caretaker turned the  switch and I was blinded by  the  sudden  flash  of  light.  He  suggested  I  go  to  the dining  hall  for  dinner.  But  I  wasn't  hungry.  Then  he offered to bring me a  cup of coffee with milk. I like milk in  my  coffee,  so  I  said  yes,  and  he  came  back  a  few minutes later with  a  tray.  I  drank the coffee.  Then  I  felt like  having  a  smoke.  But  I  hesitated,  because  I  didn't know if I could do it with Maman right there.  I  thought about  it;  it  didn't  matter.  I  offered  the  caretaker  a  cigarette  and we  smoked. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-13" class="p-indent">At  one  point  he  said,  "You  know,  your  mother's friends  will  be  coming  to  keep  vigil  too.  It's  customary. I  have  to  go  get  some  chairs  and  some  black  coffee."  I asked  him  if  he  could  turn  off  one  of  the  lights.  The glare on the white walls was making me drowsy.  He  said he couldn't. That was  how they'd been  wired :  it was  all or nothing.  I  didn't pay  too  much  attention  to  him  after that.  He  left,  came  back,  set up  some chairs.  On  one  of them  he  stacked  some  cups  around  a  coffee  pot.  Then he sat down across from me, on the other side of Maman. The  nurse  was  on  that  side  of  the  room  too,  but  with her back  to  me.  I  couldn't see what  she  was  doing.  But the way her arms were moving  made  me  think  she  was knitting.  It  was  pleasant;  the  coffee  had  warmed  me up, and the smell of flowers  on  the  night air was  coming through  the open door.  I  think I  dozed off for a  while. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-14" class="p-indent">It  was  a  rustling  sound  that  woke  me  up.  Because I'd had my eyes closed, the whiteness of the room seemed even  brighter  than  before.  There  wasn't  a  shadow  anywhere  in front of me,  and every object,  every  angle  and curve stood  out so sharply  it  made  my  eyes  hurt.  That's when  Maman's  friends  came  in.  There  were  about  ten in  all,  and  they  floated into the  blinding light without a sound.  They  sat  down  without  a  single  chair creaking.  I saw  them  more  clearly  than  I  had ever seen  anyone,  and not one detail of their  faces  or  their  clothes  escaped  me. But I couldn't hear them, and it was hard  for  me  to believe  they  really  existed.  Almost  all  the  women  were wearing  aprons,  and  the  strings,  which  were  tied  tight around  their  waists,  made  their  bulging  stomachs  stick out  even  more.  I'd  never  noticed  what  huge  stomachs old  women  can  have.  Almost  all  the  men  were  skinny and  carried  canes.  What  struck  me  most  about  their faces  was  that  I  couldn't  see  their  eyes,  just  a  faint glimmer  in  a  nest  of  wrinkles.  When  they'd  sat  down, most of them looked at me  and nodded awkwardly,  their lips sucked in by their toothless mouths, so that I couldn't tell  if  they were  greeting  me  or  if  it  was  just  a  nervous tic.  I  think  they  were  greeting  me.  It  was  then  that  I realized  they  were  all  sitting  across  from  me,  nodding their  heads,  grouped  around  the  caretaker.  For  a  second I had  the ridiculous feeling that they were there to judge me. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-15" class="p-indent">Soon  one  of  the  women  started  crying.  She  was  in the second  row,  hidden  behind  one of  her  companions, and  I  couldn't see  her  very  well.  She  was  crying softly, steadily,  in  little  sobs.  I  thought  she'd  never  stop.  The others seemed not  to  hear  her.  They  sat  there  hunched up,  gloomy  and  silent.  They  would  look  at  the  casket, or  their  canes,  or  whatever  else,  but  that  was  all  they would  look  at.  The  woman  kept  on  crying.  It  surprised me,  because  I  didn't  know  who  she  was.  I  wished  I didn't  have  to  listen  to  her  anymore.  But  I  didn't  dare say  anything.  The  caretaker  leaned  over  and  said  something  to  her,  but  she  shook  her  head,  mumbled  something,  and  went  on  crying  as much  as  before.  Then  the caretaker  came  around  to  my  side.  He sat  down  next  to me.  After  a  long  pause  he  explained,  without  looking  at me,  "She  was  very  close  to  your  mother.  She  says  your mother  was  her only  friend  and  now  she  hasn't got  anyone. "</p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-16" class="p-indent">We  just  sat  there  like  that  for  quite  a  while.  The woman's sighs and sobs were quieting down.  She sniffled a  lot.  Then  finally  she  shut  up.  I  didn't  feel  drowsy anymore,  but  I  was  tired  and  my  back  was  hurting  me. Now  it  was  all  these  people  not  making  a  sound  that was  getting  on  my  nerves.  Except  that  every  now  and then  I'd  hear  a  strange  noise  and  I  couldn't  figure  out what  it  was.  Finally  I  realized  that  some  of  the  old people  were  sucking  at  the  insides  of  their  cheeks  and making these  weird  smacking  noises.  They  were  so  lost in  their  thoughts  that  they  weren't  even  aware  of  it.  I even  had  the  impression  that  the  dead  woman  lying  in front of them didn't mean  anything to them. But I  think now that that was a  false  impression. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-17" class="p-indent">We  all  had  some  coffee,  served  by  the  caretaker. After  that  I  don't  know  any  more.  The  night  passed.  I remember  opening my  eyes  at  one point and  seeing that all the old people were slumped over asleep, except for one old  man,  with  his  chin  resting  on  the back of his hands wrapped around his cane, who was staring at me as if he were  just waiting for  me  to  wake  up. Then  I  dozed  off again.  I  woke  up  because  my  back  was  hurting  more and more. Dawn was creeping up over the skylight. Soon afterwards,  one  of  the  old  men  woke  up  and  coughed  a lot.  He  kept  hacking  into  a  large  checkered  handkerchief,  and  every cough  was  like  a  convulsion.  He  woke the  others  up,  and  the  caretaker  told  them  that  they ought  to  be  going.  They  got  up.  The  uncomfortable vigil  had  left  their  faces  ashen  looking.  On  their  way out,  and  much  to my surprise,  they all shook my hand—as  if  that  night  during  which  we  hadn't  exchanged  as much  as  a  single  word  had  somehow  brought  us  closer together. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-18" class="p-indent">I  was  tired.  The  caretaker  took  me  to  his  room  and I  was  able  to  clean  up  a  little.  I  had  some  more  coffee and  milk,  which  was  very  good.  When  I  went  outside, the  sun  was  up.  Above  the  hills  that  separate  Marengo from  the  sea,  the  sky  was  streaked  with  red.  And  the wind  coming  over  the  hills  brought  the  smell  of  salt with  it.  It was  going to  be  a  beautiful  day.  It had  been a  long  time  since  I'd  been  out  in  the  country,  and  I could  feel  how  much  I'd  enjoy  going  for  a  walk  if  it hadn't been  for Maman. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-19" class="p-indent">But  I  waited  in the courtyard,  under a  plane  tree.  I breathed  in  the  smell  of fresh  earth  and  I  wasn't  sleepy anymore. I thought of the other guys at the office. They'd be  getting up  to go  to  work about this  time :  for me  that was always the most difficult time of day.  I thought about those  things  a  little  more,  but  I  was  distracted  by  the sound  of  a  bell  ringing  inside  the  buildings.  There  was some  commotion  behind  the  windows,  then  everything quieted down  again. The sun was now  a  little higher in the  sky:  it  was  starting  to  warm  my  feet.  The  caretaker came across  the  courtyard  and  told  me  that  the  director was  asking  for  me.  I  went  to  his office.  He had  me  sign a  number  of  documents.  I  noticed  that  he  was  dressed in  black  with  pin-striped  trousers.  He  picked  up  the telephone  and  turned  to  me.  "The  undertaker's  men arrived a  few minutes ago.  I'm going to ask  them  to seal the  casket.  Before  I  do,  would  you  like  to  see  your mother  one  last  time?"  I  said  no.  He  gave  the order into the  telephone,  lowering  his  voice:  "Figeac,  tell  the  men they can go ahead." </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-20" class="p-indent">After  that  he  told  me  he  would  be  attending  the funeral and I  thanked him. He sat down behind his desk and  crossed  his  short  legs.  He  informed  me  that  he  and I would be  the only ones there,  apart  from  the nurse on duty.  The  residents  usually  weren't  allowed  to  attend funerals.  He  only  let  them  keep  the  vigil.  "It's  more humane  that  way,"  he  remarked.  But  in  this  case  he'd given  one  of  mother's  old  friends—Thomas Pérez—permission  to  join  the  funeral  procession.  At  that  the director  smiled.  He  said,  "I'm  sure  you  understand.  It's a rather childish sentiment. But he and your mother were almost  inseparable.  The  others  used  to  tease  them  and say,  'Pérez  has  a  fiancée.'  He'd  laugh.  They  enjoyed  it. And the truth  is  he's  taking  Madame  Meursault's death very  hard.  I  didn't  think  I  could  rightfully  refuse  him permission.  But  on  the  advice  of  our  visiting  physician, I did not allow him to keep the vigil last night." </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-21" class="p-indent">We didn't  say  anything  for  quite  a  long  time.  The director stood up and looked out the window of his office. A moment later he said, "Here's the priest from Marengo already.  He's early."  He warned me  that  it would  take  at least  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  walk  to  the  church, which  is  in  the  village  itself.  We  went  downstairs.  Out in  front  of  the  building  stood  the  priest  and  two  altar boys.  One  of  them was holding a  censer,  and  the  priest was leaning  toward  him, adjusting the length of its silver chain. As we approached, the priest straightened up.  He called me "my son" and said a  few words to me.  He went inside;  I  followed. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-22" class="p-indent">I  noticed  right  away  that  the  screws  on  the  casket had  been  tightened  and  that there were four men  wearing black in the room. The director was telling me that the hearse  was  waiting  out in  the  road  and  at the  same  time I could hear the priest  beginning his prayers.  From  then on  everything  happened  very  quickly.  The  men  moved toward the casket with a pall. The priest, his acolytes,  the director  and  I  all  went  outside.  A  woman  I  didn't  know was  standing  by  the  door.  "Monsieur  Meursault,"  the director  said.  I  didn't  catch  the  woman's  name;  I  just understood  that she was  the nurse assigned by the home. Without smiling  she lowered  her long, gaunt face.  Then we  stepped  aside  to  make  way  for  the  body.  We  followed  the  pall  bearers  and  left  the  home.  Outside  the gate  stood  the  hearse.  Varnished,  glossy,  and  oblong,  it reminded me of a pencil box.  Next  to  it was  the funeral director,  a  little  man  in  a  ridiculous getup,  and  an awkward, embarrassed-looking old man. I realized  that  it was Monsieur  Pérez.  He  was  wearing  a  soft  felt  hat  with  a round  crown and  a  wide  brim  (he  took  it  off  as  the casket was coming  through  the gate), a suit with  trousers that  were  corkscrewed  down  around  his  ankles,  and  a black  tie  with a  knot  that was  too small  for  the  big  white collar of his  shirt.  His lips  were  trembling below a  nose dotted  with  blackheads.  Strange,  floppy,  thick-rimmed ears  stuck  out  through  his  fine,  white  hair,  and  I  was struck  by  their  blood-red  color  next  to  the  pallor  of  his face.  The  funeral  director  assigned  us  our  places.  First came  the  priest,  then  the  hearse.  Flanking  it,  the  four men. Behind it,  the director and myself and,  bringing up the  rear,  the  nurse  and  Monsieur  Pérez. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-23" class="p-indent">The  sky  was  already  filled  with  light.  The  sun  was beginning to  bear  down  on  the  earth  and  it  was  getting hotter  by  the  minute.  I  don't  know  why  we  waited  so long  before  getting  under  way.  I  was  hot  in  my  dark clothes. The little old man, who had put his hat back on, took  it  off  again.  I  turned  a  little  in  his  direction  and was looking at him when  the  director  started  talking  to me about him.  He told me  that my mother and Monsieur Pérez often used  to walk down to  the village  together in the  evenings, accompanied  by  a  nurse.  I  was looking  at the  countryside  around  me.  Seeing  the  rows  of  cypress trees  leading  up  to  the  hills  next  to  the  sky,  and  the houses  standing  out  here  and  there  against  that  red and green earth, I was able to understand Maman better. Evenings  in  that  part  of  the  country  must  have  been  a kind of sad relief.  But today,  with  the sun  bearing down, making the whole landscape shimmer with heat, it was inhuman  and  oppressive. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-24" class="p-indent">We  got  under  way.  It  was  then  that  I  noticed  that Pérez  had  a  slight  limp.  Little  by  little,  the  hearse  was picking  up  speed  and  the  old  man  was  losing  ground. One  of  the  men  flanking  the  hearse  had  also  dropped back  and  was  now  even  with  me.  I  was  surprised  at how fast the sun was climbing in  the  sky.  I  noticed  that for quite  some  time  the  countryside  had  been  buzzing with the sound of insects and the crackling of grass.  The sweat  was  pouring  down  my  face.  I  wasn't  wearing  a hat,  so I  fanned myself with  my  handkerchief.  The man from  the undertaker's  said  something to me then  which I  missed.  He  was  lifting  the  edge  of  his  cap  with  his right  hand  and  wiping  his  head  with  a  handkerchief with his left at the same time. I said, "What?"  He pointed up  at  the  sky  and  repeated,  "Pretty  hot."  I  said,  "Yes." A minute later he asked,  "Is that your mother in  there?" Again I said, "Yes." "Was she old?" I answered,  "Fairly," because  I  didn't  know  the  exact  number.  After  that  he was quiet.  I  turned around and saw old Pérez about fifty meters behind us. He was going as fast as he could, swinging  his  felt  hat  at  the  end  of  his  arm.  I  looked  at  the director, too.  He was walking with great dignity, without a  single wasted motion.  A few beads of sweat were forming on his forehead, but he didn't wipe them off. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-25" class="p-indent">The  procession  seemed  to  me  to  be  moving  a  little faster.  All  around  me  there  was  still  the  same  glowing countryside  flooded  with  sunlight.  The  glare  from  the sky was unbearable. At one point, we went over a  section of  the  road  that  had  just  been  repaved.  The  tar  had burst  open  in  the  sun.  Our  feet  sank  into  it,  leaving  its shiny  pulp  exposed.  Sticking  up  above  the  top  of  the hearse,  the  coachman's  hard  leather  hat  looked  as  if  it had  been  molded  out  of  the  same  black  mud.  I  felt  a little lost  between  the blue  and  white of the  sky  and  the monotony  of  the  colors  around  me—the  sticky  black  of the  tar,  the  dull  black  of  all  the  clothes,  and  the  shiny black of the hearse. All of it—the sun, the smell of leather and horse dung from  the hearse, the smell of varnish and incense, and my fatigue after a night without sleep—was making  it  hard  for  me  to  see  or  think  straight.  I  turned around again :  Pérez seemed to be way back there, fading in  the  shimmering  heat.  Then  I  lost  sight  of  him  altogether.  I  looked around  and  saw  that  he'd  left  the  road and  cut  out  across  the  fields.  I  also  noticed  there  was  a bend  in  the  road  up  ahead.  I  realized  that  Pérez,  who knew the country, was taking a short cut in order to catch up  with  us.  By  the  time  we  rounded  the  bend,  he  was back  with  us.  Then  we  lost  him  again.  He  set  off  cross country  once  more,  and  so  it  went  on.  I  could  feel  the blood pounding  in  my  temples. </p>

  <p id="part1-chapter1_paragraph-26" class="p-indent">After  that,  everything  seemed  to  happen  so  fast,  so deliberately,  so  naturally  that  I  don't  remember  any  of it  anymore.  Except  for  one  thing:  as  we  entered  the village,  the  nurse  spoke  to  me.  She  had  a  remarkable voice  which  didn't  go  with  her  face  at  all,  a  melodious, quavering  voice.  She  said,  "If  you  go  slowly,  you  risk getting  sunstroke.  But  if  you  go  too  fast,  you  work  up a  sweat and  then  catch  a  chill  inside  the  church."  She was  right.  There  was  no  way out.  Several  other  images from  that  day  have  stuck  in  my  mind :  for  instance, Pérez's face when he caught up with us  for the last time, just  outside  the  village.  Big  tears  of  frustration  and  exhaustion  were  streaming down  his  cheeks.  But  because of  all  the  wrinkles,  they  weren't  dripping  off.  They spread out and  ran  together  again,  leaving a  watery  film over  his  ruined  face.  Then  there  was  the  church  and the villagers  on  the  sidewalks,  the  red  geraniums  on  the graves in the cemetery, Pérez fainting  (he crumpled  like a  rag  doll),  the  blood-red  earth  spilling  over  Maman's casket, the white flesh of the roots mixed in with  it,  more people, voices,  the village, waiting in  front of a  café,  the incessant drone of the  motor,  and  my  joy  when  the  bus entered  the nest  of lights that was Algiers  and  I  knew  I was  going  to  go  to  bed  and  sleep  for  twelve  hours. </p>
</body>
</html>
